# gly
Protein glycosylation software

Many protein based drugs are pegylated. The purpose of pegylation is to influence how long the drug stays in circulation and to influence its immunogenicity. The influence on immunogenicity is rarely perfect. In the case of peg-asparaginase, which is a treatment for leukemia, there is a 10-20% chance of an allergic reaction despite the pegylation.

Maybe nicely designed glycan coats for protein based drugs where the active sites of the drugs remain accessible, might result in drugs that while retaining the desired influence on clearance time, have improved immunogenicity properties. That this might be possible is suggested by the fact that naturally occuring proteins in circulation with extended clearance time, such as Factor X or even fibronectin, are glycosylated. In the case of Factor X it has been specifically shown that the glycan coat contributes to its long clearance time. That a glycan coat can block antibody binding and help combat immunogenicity seems intuitively obvious, and in the case of HIV for example, its glycan coat is considered a part of its ability to evade the immune system.

Having said that, glycosylation is a fairly complicated business. In humans, there are hundreds of enzymes creating glycosylation patterns with tremendous diversity. Certainly it's fair to assume that maybe these different patterns have some meaning, and in some cases they certainly do. On the other hand, it is possible that at least some of the time the purpose is simply to create a soft slippery layer around a protein such as one might find in a mucin or mucus. Maybe the reason for so many glycosylation patterns is because the particular pattern doesn't always matter. Also, there are many lectins and that glycan adhesion is a big part of the story, which makes slipperiness as an underlying purpose for glycosylation at least a little bit counter-intuitive. So in the end there is are science questions surrounding the efficacy of this idea. 

A further complication is the design of the expression system. Ideally, wouldn't it be great if it were possible to use something simple like yeast to express a protein based drug with the desired clearance time and immunogenicity properties? This could greatly reduce the cost of drug production. Out of the box, yeast is a poor choice for glycosylation of proteins destined for humans. By default they glycosylate proteins with a pattern that is easily recognized as pathogenic by the human immune system. Progress is already being made in this area with "humanized" glycan expression in yeast but one can argue that in practice, we don't know for sure how well this will work when the idea is to create a fairly dense glycan coat for a protein. Progress in expression system design might still be needed.

This is software to propose places where one might introduce N-linked glycosylation sites into an existing protein with a minimal disturbance to its structure. The idea is as much as possible to replace like with like. Asparagine (N) and serine or threonine (S/T) are hydrophilic so we want to replace residues that are hydrophilic. Since the glycan that gets attached at the asparagine is large and solvated, we want the sequon to be solvent accessible. Otherwise the attached glycan might point to the protein’s core preventing it from folding properly. Inspired by bioinformatics data found in The Structural Assessment of Glycosylation Sites Database – SAGS – An Overall View on N-Glycosylation by Marius D. Surleac, Laurentiu N. Spiridon, Robi Tacutu, Adina L Milac, Stefana M. Petrescu and Andrei-J Petrescu doi: 10.5772/51690, if the proposed glycosylation site is on a beta sheet we look for the pattern:

hydrophobic-hydrophobic-hydrophilic-hydrophobic-hydrophilic-hydrophobic

and replace the hydrophilic residues with sequon residues asparagine and threonine respectively. Since the match is rarely perfect we score the sites based on the hydropathy index found in A Simple Method for Displaying the Hydropathic Character of a Protein by Jack Kyte and Russell F. Doolittle doi:10.1016/0022-2836(82)90515-0.

If the proposed site is not on a beta sheet, the algorithm looks for solvent accessible pairs where the three residues including the pair and the residue in between them are maximally hydrophilic.

The program takes a PDB files as inputs. There is a file with the complete structure, a file with solvent exposed atoms, a file with beta sheet residues and a file with alpha helix residues. I am currently using the pymol plugin findSurfaceResidues to get the solvent exposed atoms and pymol itself to get the secondary structure files.

